---
title: Geolocalization using GeoLite2
date: 2020-10-25 20:00:00.000000000 +02:00
identifier: geolite2
categories:
- en
- python
tags:
- geoip
- geolocalization
excerpt:
    "How can you detect the countries and cities your users are coming from?
    In this post I left few words about implementing geolocalization in your
    webpage using GeoLite2."
---
You may know or not, but the knowledge about where the visitors of your webpage
are using it, allow you to better adjust the content or even make the right
decisions in the business context. So how can we actually implement such magic
in our webpage? If you're interested in the answer, this article is for you!
We'll be adding geolicalization to the sample page using a GeoLite2 library.

**TLDR;**
[GeoLite2](https://dev.maxmind.com/geoip/geoip2/geolite2/){:target="_blank"} is
a free, solid database, containing the mappings of IP addresses to cities and 
countries. There exists many ready to use APIs for that database, among others 
for C#, C, Java, JavaScript (node.js), Perl, PHP, Python and Ruby languages.

## What is GeoLite2?

[GeoLite2](https://dev.maxmind.com/geoip/geoip2/geolite2/){:target="_blank"} is
a database (encoded in the binary format), whic maps IP addresses from around the
world to countries and cities. So knowing an IP address of the user (an access 
to it isn't problematic in the case of internet websites and applications) we
can localize the country and even city from which the page was visited. Of 
course such database doesn't (and won't) have 100% accuracy, so please be aware
sometimes it'll give you a false information. However, my experience says they
are rare and the database is very accurate. How exactly accurate? The producer
says the paid version (named 
[GeoIP2](https://www.maxmind.com/en/geoip2-services-and-databases){:target="_blank"}
) includes 99.9999% of IP addresses being in use. The accuracy of pointing the
country is supposed to be 99.8%. These numbers are impressive, but we don't have
any related to the free version (so GeoLite2). The producer says only that it's
less accurate and being updated not so often like the paid one.

### Connecting with the GeoLite2 database

We start with downloading GeoLite2 database, available on the producer's website
(the MaxMind company) in
[this](https://geolite.maxmind.com/download/geoip/database/GeoLite2-Country.tar.gz){:target="_blank"}
link. Let's notice it's a database in the *country* version, which means it only
maps IP addresses to countries, not cities. It's a smaller version of the free
database, there exists *city* version (also freely available), but because it 
maps IPs also to cities, it's over 10 times larger than the *country* version.

Then we should install one of the available APIs for GeoLite2 (in our case a
Python API):

<pre>
    $ pip install geoip2
</pre>

Now we can connect to database, easiest using the script below:

{% highlight python %}
>>> import geoip2.database
>>> reader = geoip2.database.Reader('/path/to/GeoLite2-Country.mmdb')
{% endhighlight %}

Please notice the *Reader* object, connecting to the database, is supposed to be
used **for many queries**. It shouldn't be created for every single query,
because it's a costly operation. The first, simple things we can do with
the database are:

{% highlight python %}
>>> response = reader.country('135.200.12.84')
>>>
>>> response.country.iso_code
'US'
>>> response.country.name
'United States'
>>> response.subdivisions.most_specific.name
'Indiana'
>>> response.subdivisions.most_specific.iso_code
'IN'
>>> reader.close()
{% endhighlight %}

We get a concrete information about the country and region the IP comes from (in
this case an USA state). If we had connected with the *city* database, we would
receive some additional information:

{% highlight python %}
>>> response = reader.city('135.200.12.84')
>>>
>>> response.city.name
'Indianapolis'
>>> response.postal.code
'46226'
>>> response.location.latitude
39.7722
>>> response.location.longitude
-86.1565
>>> reader.close()
{% endhighlight %}

After finishing work with GeoLite2 we can call the *.close()* method on *Reader*
object (it closes the connection in an explicit way).

An interesting thing is the fact you can use GeoIP2 (so the paid version) also
in the form of web service. In such case the API remains almost the same, but
you don't have to store locally the *city* nor *country* databases.

## Geolocalization in Django

It turns out that (remaining in the Python world), the most popular web
framework for this language also supports using GeoIP2 and GeoLite2. The proper
package inside Django is called **django.contrib.gis.geoip2** and makes it
possible to import **GeoIP2** class (equivalent of the *Reader* object).
This class is a wrapper around *geoip2* library. An example work session with
this package looks like (taken from the official Django
[documentation](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/2.2/ref/contrib/gis/geoip2/){:target="_blank"}):

{% highlight python %}
>>> from django.contrib.gis.geoip2 import GeoIP2
>>>
>>> geoip = GeoIP2()
>>> geoip.country('facebook.com')
{'country_code': 'US', 'country_name': 'United States'}
>>> geoip.city('72.14.207.99')
{'city': 'Mountain View',
'continent_code': 'NA',
'continent_name': 'North America',
'country_code': 'US',
'country_name': 'United States',
'dma_code': 807,
'latitude': 37.419200897216797,
'longitude': -122.05740356445312,
'postal_code': '94043',
'region': 'CA',
'time_zone': 'America/Los_Angeles'}
>>> geoip.lat_lon('salon.com')
(39.0437, -77.4875)
>>> geoip.lon_lat('uh.edu')
(-95.4342, 29.834)
>>> geoip.geos('24.124.1.80').wkt
'POINT (-97 38)'
{% endhighlight %}

You can see the API is slightly different, using it is however still comfortable.
Django's documentation is here very helpful. But wait, how the framework does
know where the GeoIP2 (or GeoLite2) database is located? There are 3
configuration variables, which we can set in the *settings.py* file of our
project:

{% highlight python %}
GEOIP_PATH = os.path.join(BASE_DIR, 'common', 'geoip', 'country_dataset')
GEOIP_COUNTRY = 'Geo_db_country.mmdb'  # defaults to 'GeoLite2-Country.mmdb'
GEOIP_CITY = 'Geo_db_city.mmdb'        # defaults to 'GeoLite2-City.mmdb'
{% endhighlight %}

First of them, *GEOIP_PATH* is required. The rest are optional as long as we
stick with the default names for database files for cities and countries.

### The idea: intelligent language and localization choosing on the page

In this part of the article we use geolocalization to implement an intelligent
mechanism of automatically choosing language and country on the page. It means
that user visiting our page from e.g. Madrid will see it in spanish language 
and Spain will be set as a localization (of course assuming the application 
supports spanish translations ;). Such behavior can be important from the 
business point of view, because sometimes when we sell some products/services
in the Internet, our offer can differ between countries. How can we implement
it in Django?

### Example middleware

The good starting point here is implementing function's decorator (e.g.
@set_country_and_language) or custom middleware (it's a mechanism used heavily
in Djangos' applications, makes possible to process a request before it will be
actually handled by the view function). In this case we choose the second
option.

Let's start with creating a new file (often called *middleware.py* in Django)
and defining inside it few imports needed:

{% highlight python %}
from django.utils import translation
from common.constans import DEFAULT_COUNTRY
from common.geoip.utils import detect_country_by_IP
from common.models import CountryModel
from common.utils import get_language_associated_with_country
{% endhighlight %}

The django.utils.translation package is responsible for enabling proper language
on page after country detection. DEFAULT_COUNTRY is a normal text constant, may
be equal to e.g. 'GB'. It means the default country will be Great Britain, in
the case we won't be able to detect country based on IP. detect_country_by_IP is
a helper function making an actual detection. CountryModel is a country model
in the application. And the last import, get_language_associated_with_country is
a function mapping country on the language assigned to it.

{% highlight python  %}
class GeoIPMiddleware:
    """
    Custom geo location middleware which tries to detect user country and
    language in case of country is not already set in session (like when user
    visits site for the first time).

    Location is set based on request's IP address and by using django.contrib.gis.geoip2 package.
    """
{% endhighlight %}

The middleware is a class like any other, it doesn't need to inherit from any
base class. We add also some concise description.

Every middleware implements one or more methods called by Django, most often
it's a *process_request* method with the request as an argument. Framework calls
it with every request, before it even decide which view should handle it:

{% highlight python  %}
def process_request(self, request):
    if 'country' not in request.session:
        detected_country_code = detect_country_by_IP(
            request.META['REMOTE_ADDR'])
        application_country_code = self._get_application_country(
            detected_country_code)
        associated_language = get_language_associated_with_country(
            application_country_code)

        request.session['country'] = application_country_code
        translation.activate(associated_language)

        return None
{% endhighlight %}

Our middleware is basically handling the case when the key *country* is not set
in session. Then we run the country detection (using *detect_country_by_IP*
function, the IP address is taken from request object as 
*request.META['REMOTE_ADDR']*). Next we check whether in the database exists
the country returned from detection process or not (*_get_application_country*
method, implementation in the next part of the article) - it may be the case
detection pointed e.g. Democratic Republic of the Kongo, but our app doesn't
handle this country ;) Then we get the language associated with the country
(*get_language_associated_with_country*), set country in session dict and
activate proper language (translations) on the page.

Every middleware in Django should return *None* or an object of class
*HttpResponse*. In our case *process_request* method returns *None*, so Django
will process the requests further.

#### Helper functions implementation

{% highlight python  %}
def detect_country_by_IP(ip_address):

    """
    Auto-detects user's country based on IP address
    Implementation uses GeoIP2 package

    :param ip_address: IP address as string to look up
    :return: Country code as string
    """

    try:
        geoip = GeoIP2()
        geoip_guess = geoip.country_code(ip_address)
        if geoip_guess is not None:
            detected_country_code = geoip_guess
        else:
            detected_country_code = DEFAULT_COUNTRY
    except GeoIP2Error:
        detected_country_code = DEFAULT_COUNTRY

    return detected_country_code
{% endhighlight %}

First of the used helper functions (*detect_country_by_IP*) creates the *GeoIP2*
object and tries to get country code based on IP address. When this step
completes, geolocalization was successful! In the other case we use a default
country.

{% highlight python %}
def _get_application_country(self, proposed_country_code):
    proposed_country_exists = CountryModel.objects.filter(
        country=proposed_country_code).exists()
    if proposed_country_exists:
        return proposed_country_code

    return DEFAULT_COUNTRY
{% endhighlight %}

Next we call *_get_application_country* method. When application doesn't handle
the country detected by geolocalization, we also choose the default one.

I won't put an implementation of *get_language_associated_with_country*
function, because it's specific to the application. Each country can just have
assigned to it some default language and the responsibility of this function is
to point which language should be used with given country.

#### Add middleware to the application's settings

Now we only need to add our middleware to the list of these being used by the
application (in *settings.py* of our project):

{% highlight python %}
MIDDLEWARE_CLASSES = [
    'django.middleware.security.SecurityMiddleware',
    'django.contrib.sessions.middleware.SessionMiddleware',
    'django.middleware.locale.LocaleMiddleware',
    ...
    'common.geoip.middleware.GeoIPMiddleware',
]
{% endhighlight %}

It's best to do it at the end of the list, because it will be used after
processing by any previous middleware, coming from the framework itself.

## Geolocalization - the summary

As I tried to prove, the geolocalization topic isn't a hard functionality to
implement in your webpage. There exists a ready-to-use, free library GeoLite2.
Using it, you can add geolocalization to your website in an easy way.
Additionally, this library has a full support in Django, which is also a plus.
I hope I explained this topic to you a little, thanks for reading and
see you in the next post!
